Bluetooth: Mesh: Docs: add info about trusted storage (#21398)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/security/trusted_storage.rst

   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The :ref:`trusted_storage_in_ncs` is a security mechanism designed to securely store and manage sensitive data, such as cryptographic keys, device credentials, and configuration data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trusted storage is a library designed to securely store and manage sensitive data, such as cryptographic keys, device credentials, and configuration data.
```

> The mechanism is essential for IoT devices, as it allows the implementation of secure communication between devices.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, this should not point to the library in the first line (see comment from Tomi about renaming this page, it's about more than just the library.) So what we need to do here is keep the lines you're removing (10-12) and say for lines 10 through 22:
```
There are several options for storing keys and other important data persistently when developing applications with the |NCS|, each with different features.
The implementation of the PSA Certified Secure Storage API can be provided using one of the following options:

* TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT).
  This can only be used if the `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation are supported by the platform in use.
* The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library, which enables you to provide features like integrity, confidentiality, and authenticity of the stored data without using the TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT).

The trusted storage library implements the PSA Certified Secure Storage API and is designed to securely store and manage sensitive data, such as cryptographic keys, device credentials, and configuration data.
The mechanism is essential for IoT devices, as it allows the implementation of secure communication between devices.

The PSA Certified Secure Storage API consists of PSA Internal Trusted Storage API and PSA Protected Storage API.
```

> The implementation of the PSA Certified Secure Storage API can be provided by either:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation of the PSA Certified Secure Storage API can be provided using one of the following options:
```

* TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT).

>   This can only be utilized if the `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation are supported by the platform in use.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This can only be used if the `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation are supported by the platform in use.
```

> * The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library.

Reviewer: This is not true. This whole paragraph could be removed.

Author: About the backend implementation options for PSA Certified Secure Storage API? Can you elaborate a bit (not an expert in this topic), because that is basically copied from the documentation that was in matter for this.

Reviewer 2: I think Tomi is referring to the beginning of the document (in this PR, under these lines):

> The trusted storage library enables you to provide features like integrity, confidentiality and authenticity of the stored data, without using the TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT). The library implements the PSA Certified Secure Storage API. It consists of PSA Internal Trusted Storage API and PSA Protected Storage API.

Which also sounds like these two parts are contradicting one another.

Author: I see. The lines you copied here have been in the document beforehand though, so perhaps it sounds contradictory since it is formulated with a different viewpoint on it? If you (or Tomi) think those lines you quoted should be removed, I'd just follow that. @tomi-font ?

Reviewer: Now, acknowledging that there is sloppy wording on this page, maybe we could just do the following change (only the first sentence modified):
```suggestion
The implementation of the PSA Certified Secure Storage API can be provided by either:

* TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT).
  This can only be used if the `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation are supported by the platform in use.
* The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library.
```

IMO "trusted storage" should only be used for the library: https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/pull/21398#discussion_r2035049155

> * The :ref:trusted_storage_readme |NCS| software library.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library.
```

* Secure Storage (internal storage)

The Secure External Storage SFR is not covered by the trusted storage library by default, but you can implement a custom storage backend.

.. _trusted_storage_backends_aead:

Trusted storage backends and AEAD key generation
------------------------------------------------

:ref:trusted_storage_in_ncs is a security mechanism designed to securely store and manage sensitive data, such as cryptographic keys, device credentials, and configuration data.
The mechanism is essential for IoT devices, as it allows the implementation of secure communication between devices.

The Trusted Storage can utilize one of the following backends to implement PSA Certified Secure Storage API:

* TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT).
  This can only be utilized if the ARM TrustZone_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation are supported by the platform in use.

> * The :ref:trusted_storage_readme |NCS| software library.

Reviewer 4: Yes, lines 101-108.

The trusted storage library provides confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity for the assets it operates on.
It handles sensitive data in two contexts:

* Volatile - Before data is forwarded to the non-volatile storage and after it is retrieved from the non-volatile storage.
* Non-volatile - When data is written to the non-volatile memory in encrypted form.

In the case of the volatile context, the trusted storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD).
It is used to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are being securely stored in the non-volatile memory.
AEAD can be configured with the set of Kconfig options described in the library's :ref:trusted_storage_configuration section.

An important setting, that depends on the hardware platform in use, is the way of generating the AEAD keys.
The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:lib_hw_unique_key (HUK) library.
HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK Kconfig option for compatible configurations.

> The HUK library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for :ref:`mesh_samples` in the |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 and nRF54L platforms:

Author: Yeah, I see maybe I should have updated the PR in the morning with fresh eyes instead. I'll go through your comments and update it once more soon. Thanks for all the help!

> The HUK library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for :ref:`mesh_samples` in the |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 and nRF54L platforms:

Author: While in my study of the topic, I changed the phrasing a bit, those parts are identical for mesh and matter samples, and would assume for most samples in NCS. So kept that part for here now, but don't reference specific samples. Let me know what you think of that.

* Secure Storage (internal storage)

The Secure External Storage SFR is not covered by the trusted storage library by default, but you can implement a custom storage backend.

.. _trusted_storage_backends_aead:

Trusted storage backends and AEAD key generation
------------------------------------------------

> The trusted storage handles sensitive data in two contexts:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The trusted storage handles sensitive data in the following two contexts:
```

* Volatile - Before data is forwarded to the non-volatile storage and after it is retrieved from the non-volatile storage.
* Non-volatile - When data is written to the non-volatile memory in encrypted form.

> In the case of the volatile context, the trusted storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the case of the volatile context, the :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD).
```

> It is used to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are being securely stored in the non-volatile memory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is used to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are securely stored in the non-volatile memory.
```

> AEAD can be configured with the set of Kconfig options described in the library's :ref:trusted_storage_configuration section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can configure AEAD with the set of Kconfig options described in the library's :ref:`trusted_storage_configuration` section.
```

> An important setting, that depends on the hardware platform in use, is the way of generating the AEAD keys.

Reviewer 3: This leaves questions. Which setting exactly?

Author: Line is copied from the matter docs: https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ncs-latest/page/nrf/protocols/matter/end_product/security.html#trusted_storage 

I assume the important setting is "the way of generating the AEAD keys"... tbh I don't know nearly enough about this topic to say more to this. Perhaps @jfischer-no or @markaj-nordic remember when they added the docs here (https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/commit/ace7156c3f159d66f85af3b8115578786757cb87#diff-7ae2e64ed4ff54ea6212f31cb335566fde542a51a275d6ec347aca01f7a8c2e0R55) last year?

Reviewer: This is talking about the `CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY` choice. This sentence is wonky and could be reworked.

Author: @peknis any input how to phrase it? (I am sure if I try, you will correct me, but maybe I can save one round of review :) )

Reviewer 3: @tomi-font, please help me out of this as you probably know the actual beef better than me. Let's make this document great again :)

> The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:lib_hw_unique_key (HUK) library.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` (HUK) library.
```

> HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK Kconfig option for compatible configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible configurations.
```

> The HUK library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for most samples in |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 and nRF54L platforms:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for most samples in the |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 devices and nRF54L platforms:
```

* For the nRF5340 platform, the HUK is generated at first boot and stored in the Key Management Unit (KMU).
  No changes to the existing partition layout are needed for products in the field.

> * For the nRF54L15 NS platform, the HUK generation and management is handled by the Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) library.

Reviewer 3: We only have one TF-M library in the NCS docs. Do you mean this https://docs.nordicsemi.com/bundle/ncs-latest/page/nrf/libraries/security/tfm/tfm_ioctl_api.html?

Reviewer 3: And do we need to have NS here?

Reviewer 3: Can you confirm with someone whether that would be the correct library to link to?

Reviewer: I think the phrasing here is wrong, and should rather say
```suggestion
* For the nRF54L15 NS platform, the HUK generation and management is handled by Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M).
```

Author: @peknis happy with the change?

Reviewer 3: > @peknis happy with the change?

I guess it is correct as this comes from Tomi.

> * For the nRF52840 platform, AEAD keys are derived using a SHA-256 hash of the device's UID (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* For the nRF52840 devices, AEAD keys are derived using a SHA-256 hash of the device's UID (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`).
```

>   This approach is less secure than using the library for key derivation as it will only provide integrity of sensitive material.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This approach is less secure than using the library for key derivation as it only provides integrity of sensitive material.
```

>   It is also possible to implement a custom AEAD keys generation method when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_CUSTOM` Kconfig option is selected.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  It is also possible to implement a custom AEAD key generation method when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_CUSTOM` Kconfig option is selected.
```

> Using the HUK library with nRF52840 SoC is possible, but it requires employing the :ref:`bootloader` that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` library with the nRF52840 SoC, but it requires employing the :ref:`bootloader` that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.
```

.. note::

>     Modifying the partition layout, such as adding another partition in the FLASH layout, will break firmware backward compatibility with already deployed devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Modifying the partition layout, such as adding another partition in the FLASH layout, will break the firmware backward compatibility with already deployed devices.
```

> * Devices which don't have TrustZone separation (i.e. nRF52840) use hardware unique keys to reach level 1 PSA certification
>     .. note::
> 
>         Any nRF52 devices that do not use NSIB would need to use e.g. UID hash for key derivation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Devices that do not have TrustZone separation (for example nRF52840) use hardware unique keys to reach level 1 PSA certification.

    .. note::

        Any nRF52 Series devices that do not use NSIB, need to use for example UID hash for key derivation.
```

* Secure Storage (internal storage)

The Secure External Storage SFR is not covered by the trusted storage library by default, but you can implement a custom storage backend.

.. _trusted_storage_backends_aead:

Trusted storage backends and AEAD key generation
------------------------------------------------

> The trusted storage handles sensitive data in the following two contexts:

Reviewer: either
```suggestion
Trusted storage handles sensitive data in the following two contexts:
```
or
```suggestion
The trusted storage library handles sensitive data in the following two contexts:
```

* Volatile - Before data is forwarded to the non-volatile storage and after it is retrieved from the non-volatile storage.
* Non-volatile - When data is written to the non-volatile memory in encrypted form.

> In the case of the volatile context, the :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the case of the volatile context, the :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD`).
```

> In the case of the volatile context, the :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD).

Reviewer 2: Why is the information about the library added in the Trusted storage document in Security? This document documents different solutions for Trusted storage, not the library. Library-specific info should go into the library documentation.

Author: If you point me to he right file, I can move the part over there :) Some background: We wanted to add trusted storage documentation in mesh as it was done in matter, but since most of it would have been a copy-and-paste, it made more sense to move those parts to a common place, hence I ended up adding to and modifying the trusted_storage.rst

Reviewer 2: Here's the library doc https://github.com/nrfconnect/sdk-nrf/blob/main/doc/nrf/libraries/security/trusted_storage.rst . The trusted storage in the NCS should only include what goes beyond the library. (I'll be looking at that doc in the next few months.)

Reviewer: Oh right. Then it looks like we have some misnaming here. I think we should rename this page (and occurrences of trusted storage except from the library) to secure storage. That's because this is the actual name of the API: https://arm-software.github.io/psa-api/storage/

Reviewer 2: Ah, this proposed renaming means more ripples through the doc structure. I will address this in a [separate task](https://nordicsemi.atlassian.net/browse/NCSDK-32976).  For this PR, @KyraLengfeld , please proceed with separating info about the library and putting it in the library doc I linked above.

> It is used to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are securely stored in the non-volatile memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is used to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are securely stored in the non-volatile memory with authentication.
```

You can configure AEAD with the set of Kconfig options described in the library's :ref:`trusted_storage_configuration` section.

> An important setting, that depends on the hardware platform in use, is the way of generating the AEAD keys.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the more important Kconfig options is :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY`, which selects the implementation for providing AEAD keys.
```

The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` (HUK) library.
HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible configurations.

> The :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for most samples in the |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 devices and nRF54L platforms:

Reviewer: The HUK library is also supported on CRACEN-powered devices. Maybe we shouldn't explicitly list supported devices, there's already a mismatch in this very sentence.

Reviewer: Yeah, a more open phrasing could do. Also, if keeping devices listed explicitly, IMO you could add the nRF54L Series devices to the list of supported devices.

* For the nRF5340 platform, the HUK is generated at first boot and stored in the Key Management Unit (KMU).
  No changes to the existing partition layout are needed for products in the field.

* For the nRF54L15 NS platform, the HUK generation and management is handled by the Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) library.

> * For the nRF52840 devices, AEAD keys are derived using a SHA-256 hash of the device's UID (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`).

Reviewer: The configuration will still default to `CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` on the 52840 because it's supported by the HUK library. And this is all just a Kconfig `choice`.

Author: How about I add a half sentence, like: "For the nRF52840 devices, default is :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option and AEAD keys are derived using a SHA-256 hash of the device's UID (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`)"
Would that be correct?

Reviewer 5: @KyraLengfeld, I guess this is misunderstanding. The documentation was moved from Matter documentation and default is exactly `CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID` for Matter as well as for Bluetooth Mesh. If it is going to be changed here on `CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` the appropriate chapter should appear in Matter and Mesh docs.

Reviewer: Hmm yeah, obviously default behaviors might change if the configuration selects different things.
Maybe we should just state something more generic instead, like have a look at the Kconfig choice, and briefly explaining the different existing options without going into too much detail regarding the defaults?

Reviewer 5: Kind of disagree. From network protocol users point of view, the crypto library is not the first and even not the second priority to be interested in. Such details as default key generation approach should be mentioned explicitly to not spend time for investigation.

Reviewer 5: Not yet. I need to see the final version to be sure.

  This approach is less secure than using the library for key derivation as it only provides integrity of sensitive material.
  It is also possible to implement a custom AEAD key generation method when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_CUSTOM` Kconfig option is selected.

> You can use the :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` library with the nRF52840 SoC, but it requires employing the :ref:`bootloader` that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.
> .. note::
> 
>     Modifying the partition layout, such as adding another partition in the FLASH layout, will break the firmware backward compatibility with already deployed devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  You can use the :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` library with the nRF52840 SoC, but it requires employing the :ref:`bootloader` that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.
  
  .. note::

     Modifying the partition layout, such as adding another partition in the FLASH layout, will break the firmware backward compatibility with already deployed devices.
```

Reviewer: `with already deployed devices` => `in already deployed devices`

> * Devices that do not have TrustZone separation (for example nRF52840) use hardware unique keys to reach level 1 PSA certification.
> 
>     .. note::
> 
>         Any nRF52 Series devices that do not use NSIB, need to use for example UID hash for key derivation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Devices that do not have TrustZone separation (for example nRF52840) use hardware unique keys to reach level 1 PSA certification.

  .. note::

     Any nRF52 Series devices that do not use NSIB, need to use for example UID hash for key derivation.
```

>         Any nRF52 Series devices that do not use NSIB, need to use for example UID hash for key derivation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Any nRF52 Series devices that do not use NSIB need to use for example UID hashing for key derivation.
```

It is used to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are securely stored in the non-volatile memory with authentication.
You can configure AEAD with the set of Kconfig options described in the library's :ref:`trusted_storage_configuration` section.

One of the more important Kconfig options is :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY`, which selects the implementation for providing AEAD keys.
The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` (HUK) library.
HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible configurations.

The :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for most samples in the |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 devices and nRF54L platforms:

* For the nRF5340 platform, the HUK is generated at first boot and stored in the Key Management Unit (KMU).
  No changes to the existing partition layout are needed for products in the field.

> * For the nRF54L15 NS platform, the HUK generation and management is handled by Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M).

Reviewer 5: What happens just for nRF54L15 without TF-M with mbedTLS PSA? Seems like missed this description.

Reviewer: Trusted storage library + HUK library I'd say
